I arrive at my friend Becca’s apartment at a little after ten and park between a Jeep from North Carolina and a Civic from Illinois. It’s hot because of the sun and humid because of the rain this morning, and although dark clouds are gathering on the horizon, the weather app on my phone tells me not to worry about rain until tonight.

I knock and let myself in--Becca hasn’t locked her door in years and hasn’t seen the key for at least that long. She greets me and I sit on the couch beneath index-card sketches of Bill Clinton and other naked celebrities.

“Suzanne was a total brat last night,” she says as she rummages through her purse for her heart medication. Suzanne, her black, battle-scarred and uniformly affection tabby, stands on the couch next to me as I scratch her arched back. “I wouldn’t let her out, so she kept howling and walking all over my face.”

Becca is I think referring to the pre-protests that occurred last night, when a few hundred or so Alt-Right ralliers, who’ve arrived early for today’s Unite the Right demonstration, marched up to Thomas Jefferson’s Rotunda wielding tiki torches and were subsequently dispersed, pepper-sprayed, and moderately arrested.

“Ready to go?” she asks.

Emancipation Park, formerly Lee park, is the site of the massive bronze statue of a horse-mounted Robert E. Lee--which, despite a Charlottesville City Council vote in April to remove it, remains, thanks in part to a 1902 statute protecting war monuments. The park is a half-dozen or so blocks from her apartment.

For the past few months, the issue of what on earth we should do with this statue has been the go-to topic to debate. Some say that we ought to take it down, since a memorial to the general of a pro-slavery and ultimately quelled rebellion in downtown Charlottesville in twenty-fucking-seventeen is offensive and illogical and clearly incendiary and, quite frankly, downright unpatriotic. Others say that it ought to be transported to a museum somewhere, out-of-sight but still in-sight enough so that we’re not straight-up censoring history. Still others say that the offensiveness of the thing is exactly the reason we need to keep it right there in the park, to remind us that the first amendment isn’t any good unless it’s protecting offensive things. I wonder whether it would be best to remove the Robert E. Lee part of the statue and leave the horse, who, though Confederate, can hardly be blamed, and replace it with a statue of Foghorn Leghorn or Gumby or something.

We decide to head down to East Main Street and cut over. When we come to a do-not-walk light and see no vehicles coming from either direction, Becca suggests we go for it. I tell her that one of my goals for the day is to break knowingly as few laws as possible.

City, County, and State Police wearing yellow vests and triple-brim hats linger in groups of five to twenty. We spot a few Postal Service officers similarly decked, and Becca tells me this is following a mailbox-related bomb scare at the May 13 protest, where a handful of Ku-Klux Klan members were met by two-thousand or so counter-protesters. None of them, the officers, smile at me, but to be fair I haven’t smiled at any of them either.

As we’re walking we stop for a photo-op at the Freedom of Speech Wall, a thirty-or-so-foot slate wall that the city supplies with chalk, where I ponder the logistics of convincing a police officer to handcuff me and let Becca snap a photo. She advises me against this, and I very briefly consider paying one of the officers twenty dollars to let me quickly do this, but I decide that such an offer could be construed as bribery and while I’d get my photo, sure, it would put sort of a damper on the rest of the afternoon.

The rally isn’t slated to begin officially until noon, and Becca and I are hungry, so we decide on a quick detour to the farmer’s market hoping to score some empanadas and/or beignets. When we get there only a few tents remain standing, and all of the farmer are in the process of packing it in. We leave disappointed and don’t think to ask if they are vacating voluntarily.

It’s a little after eleven when we arrive at the park. There are more middle-aged suburbanites than I had expected. Aging hippies and bun-wearing, sunglassed dudes and elifin women exhibiting midriffs stand in agglomerations as camo-clad, open-carrying militiamen patrol peripatetically alone or in pairs, and regarding this latter subpopulation I consider that should the National Guard make an appearance, as has been rumored, it might not be immediately clear who is who, at least to us civilians. I see what I assume are career protesters: small caravans of black-and-rainbow-clothed men and women with handkerchiefs and swim-goggles around their necks carrying weathered anti-Trump signage.

Occupying Emancipation Park the Alt-Righters themselves. I see only their flank, made up of young men sporting plastic and wooden shields with arcane symbology, gas masks, and thousand-yard stares. Beyond them, up the hill that is the park, flags wave, some Confederate and some with swastikas and others I’ve never seen before, and I scold myself for not researching any of this earlier. More police stand around behind temporary barriers and tape, and for the most part nobody other than other officers come within twenty or so feet of them.

The smell is a mix of cigarette and body odor, which reminds me of marketplaces in Nigeria, where I spent a summer volunteering with a local medical NGO, and I relish the nostalgia for a moment. Behind us a group of men wearing Black Lives Matter on their shirts pipes a recording into the streets over their speaker system, and for the next half hour or so we listen to the sounds of “The story of the negro in America is the story of America.” There is some shouting here and there, and while most everyone around us is just standing around, we can see down the block to library, where gas canisters and rocks and other items arc through the air in both directions. A fifty-something fellow in a lime-green tee and boonie hat tells a passing sixty-something, goateed fellow to get a haircut, which I find strange because his hair isn’t that long to begin with, and on further inspection I note that the fellow who suggested this could probably use a trim himself. (EDIT: Becca has informed me that this was an inside joke between two hippies that had sailed over my head like a water bottle.)

“Let’s get closer,” says Becca.

Now, I don’t normally take a lot of selfies, and in fact I can probably count on two hands the number I’ve taken in my life, but I felt that I would be remiss to get all the way here and leave without some sort of hard documentation of my “participation.” On the other hand, I don’t want to be that guy who goes to a protest where people are protesting meaningful things only to take pictures of himself to show to co-workers, and in the end I snap a few quick shots of myself next to the shielded ralliers and figure I can decide later whether to delete or share them. (I’ve since shared a few, but only because I was looking pretty sharp then, despite my face-bending glasses, which I’ve worn in public exactly twice since I got them a few years ago. Apparently contact lenses plus even residual tear gas equals a less-than-desirable experience.)

We back off and find some shade and watch as for the next twenty or so minutes groups of ragtag ralliers embark on or return from some pressing mission. Occasionally they travel in pseudo-military formation, each with a hand on the shoulder of his comrade in front, forming a chain, as though to be separated will surely result in being taken captive.

A couple we met briefly at a know-your-rights-type meeting at the library a week before is standing next to us. She is wearing on her sleeveless tee a picture of Native Americans and the words Domestic Terrorists. “They’ve declared a state of emergency,” she says. “Riot police are on their way.”
Various missiles continue to soar down the street near the library, and at some point a bit of thrashing breaks out, prompting Becca and I to retreat and regroup. She spots a man walking by clutching his bloodied and swollen head, but I miss it. A policeman with a megaphone announces that the event has been declared an unlawful assembly and that we are to disperse immediately or risk arrest, though it is unclear whether he means the ralliers or us or simply everyone. I look at my watch--eleven fifty. The whole thing is over before it even begins.

But the excitement isn’t. Next to the dispersing ralliers someone is shouting and banging a stick on the pavement, when another man pulls out--and I shit you not--an aerosol can and lighter and sends forth a stream of fire at least a foot long directly at the ralliers. Becca and I start to move on down the street when we hear a loud pop, which sends the crowd clamoring and expanding. I inhale some smoke, as we are downwind--not enough to damage me in any way, but enough that I will feel later that I had been someplace meaningful at a meaningful time--not that anyone will buy this.

There is shouting and other loud noises and many guns and hurrying medics being called in multiple directions and I do not feel that I am in danger. In fact I am a touch disappointed by voyeurism of it all--I feel like I’m at some twisted parade and that at any moment a clown could come by and throw candy at me. Then a twinge of guilt seeps in as I wonder whether don’t feel guilty because I’m white, or because I’m male and white, or because I’m young and therefore invincible, or because I am simply not in any immediate danger.

I run into a friend I met while dancing a few years ago. He served in the Peace Corps and is in town for the weekend. I ask him whether he’s enjoying the excitement. “Not really,” he says, and I understand this to mean that his heart is breaking, not bored. This sparks in me an inner dialogue of self-criticism that follows me closely for the better part of the next ten minutes and lingers a while after that.

The ralliers continue to march down the road and we figure they’re headed for McIntyre Park, to where the rally had been rescheduled and later un-rescheduled following a last-minute ruling by a federal judge. Someone calls for a medic and we watch as a man is escorted to the side of a building by a couple wearing makeshift riot gear and EMS patches on their vests. The man’s eyes are swollen and his face is dripping with white liquid, which Becca and I agree is meant to neutralize some sort of tear gas or pepper spray.

Becca and I decide that we’ve had our fill. There is another burst of excitement and we quickly turn and hurry away, ahead of the body of the crowd. Two young women are ahead of us, escaping with serpentine movements, pausing every few seconds to peer over their shoulders. It hits me that they are employing some sort of tactic for which they had received training to avoid being themselves hit by aimed projectiles, which puts me in sort of an odd position: I can either risk being struck by something possessing both mass and velocity, or I can risk future ridicule by Becca (unspoken, of course, but I know she’ll be thinking it) at my floundering and melodrama. I opt to pick up my pace a little and look back periodically, having realized that showing off some lump on my head will make me look pretty silly indeed when someone thinks to ask why I didn’t get out of the way.

On our way back to her apartment, we pass a former co-worker of mine, and as I approach him, he shakes his head solemnly. I introduce him and Becca to each other and I can see that he isn’t feeling well. “I can still feel it tingling on my skin,” he says. I mention that I saw him working at a new restaurant, and we talk shop for a while, and I’m hoping that the distraction will do him some good.

Becca gets a text and tells me that if we can make it to a brewery down the street, we should be safe. I don’t feel to be in any particularly immediate danger, but it’s a fine idea, so we head on down Water Street, where a group of ralliers and counter-protesters are shouting at one another. I will learn later that about twenty minutes after we leave, a car will crash through a group of protesters on Fourth and Water, resulting in serious injuries and at least one death. On the other side of town, a helicopter will crash, killing at least two more. As Becca and I are on our way to the brewery, we decide that it’s safe enough to cross town and head to her apartment.

We have returned from our outing. The dark clouds have mostly disappeared, and only a few white, non-threatening ones remain, though my phone continues to insist that there will be storms tonight. Suzanne lounges on the back of the couch by the window dreaming idly of escape, and Becca and I, still hungry, get in my car and drive away from the town in search of cheeseburgers.
